.. scale_computing.hypercore.quickstart:

Quickstart Guide
================

This guide will walk users through a few foundational Ansible terms and
concepts, introduce the HyperCore collection, and provide guidance on
writing playbooks.

**Introduction**

Scale Computing recently launched the SC//HyperCore Collection for Ansible. This exciting tool gives MSPs and distributed edge
organizations the ability to implement declarative configuration
management in their HyperCore fleet. Ansible is an IT automation tool
designed to automate server provisioning and management via playbooks.
These playbooks are similar to scripts, but have two key benefits,
namely: they are human readable and idempotent, meaning they can be run
several times and are smart enough to only take actions that are
required (and skip those that aren’t) to put a HyperCore cluster in the
desired state. These benefits make Ansible ideal for managing large
HyperCore fleets.

.. note::
   Ansible is an open source tool maintained by Red Hat. It is
   completely free to install and use. ScaleCare support may
   provide best-effort assistance in writing playbooks and
   diagnosing issues. 

   However, the HyperCore Collection for Ansible is fully 
   supported by Red Hat for customers that purchase the 
   `Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform <https://www.ansible.com/products/automation-platform>`_

   `Contact ScaleCare Support <https://www.scalecomputing.com/support>`_

**Overview and Terminology**

Before you can begin writing playbooks and automating HyperCore
management, we must first cover a few important concepts. First, it is
important to note that Ansible is a powerful tool that gives users the
ability to accomplish the same task in a myriad of different ways. It
gives users the building blocks needed to automate their own processes.
Thus, this guide only scratches the surface of what can be accomplished
with Ansible.

Second, Ansible commands need to be run from an “Ansible Server” (also
called an “Ansible Control Host”). In some cases, this is actually a
dedicated physical server or VM, however this is not always necessary.
Users can run ansible from a workstation, this local machine contains
the necessary playbooks to run against the servers being managed.

Third, Open SSH is the default communication standard used by Ansible
for remote administration. Crucially, this is not how Ansible will
communicate with HyperCore clusters, as will be demonstrated later in
this guide. Now, let us turn to important terms and concepts.

Inventory
---------

Ansible is incredibly useful for managing many HyperCore clusters.
Ansible relies on an inventory file to establish which clusters you want
to target with your playbooks. This file is most commonly formatted in
either INI or YAML and lists your clusters. For larger organizations,
the inventory is also the ideal location to organize your fleet,
particularly when you desire different cluster states based on different
criteria (location, size, purpose, etc.). The most basic YAML-formatted
inventory file is organized like this:

::

   all:
     hosts:
       mail.example.com:
     children:
       webservers:
         hosts:
           foo.example.com:
           bar.example.com:
       dbservers:
         hosts:
           one.example.com:
           two.example.com:
           Three.example.com:

*hosts* denotes individual target servers (in the case of HyperCore you
could point to a FQDN or IP address of a node in the cluster) while
*children*: and signifiers like *webservers*: and *dbservers*: organize
hosts into different categories. A small HyperCore inventory might look
something like this:

.. figure:: /image/sample.png
   :alt: Inventory File Example

   Alt Text

Ansible Configuration File
---------------------------

When running Ansible commands and writing playbooks it is important to
specify where your inventory is and other configuration specifics, like
your Ansible collection path. This file serves as the center to all of
your server interactions.

Upon installing Ansible, you will be provided with a default
configuration file (ansible.cfg). The default configuration is a large
file that you can choose to use, however it is also fine to create your
own simplified version. The most important thing is to make sure your
work is referencing the correct configuration file. The easiest way to
achieve this is by including an ansible.cfg in the directory where you
are working with Ansible or setting it as an environment variable.

For the purposes of this guide, you need to make sure your configuration
file specifies where your inventory is located. All that is required is
to set inventory = [folder that contains your inventory in your working
ansible directory]. You can reference a specific file or an entire
inventory folder. An example of a simple configuration file looks like
this:

.. figure:: /image/sample.png
   :alt: Ansible Configuration File Example

   Ansible Configuration File Example

Ansible Module
--------------

Now that you are familiar with Ansible inventories and configuration
files we can turn to the meat of Ansible and the HyperCore collection:
modules. Ansible Modules are units of code that can control the servers
that you are managing with Ansible. After installing Ansible, you will
have access to a library of modules that give you the ability to execute
specific tasks on remote servers through playbooks and individual
commands. Scale Computing has made managing your HyperCore fleet via
Ansible possible by developing our own set of modules that call existing
cluster REST API endpoints. Extensive documentation on our current
available modules can be found
`here <https://galaxy.ansible.com/scale_computing/hypercore>`__.

For example: *scale_computing.hypercore.vm* is the module that will
allow you to create, update, and delete virtual machines. When you begin
writing playbooks, you will reference a specific module when attempting
to automate a task associated with that said module is equipped to
handle.

Ansible Playbook
-----------------

Finally, playbooks are the most important piece of Ansible. Playbooks
allow you to automate tasks that would normally need to be done more
than once across the clusters in your fleet. While similar to scripts,
playbooks are much easier to write because they are human readable.
Additionally, we have in-depth documentation about every module
available in the Ansible collection, with specific examples of how each
module can be written as a task that is part of a playbook.
Additionally, playbooks and Ansible are idempotent, meaning that they
are smart enough to know if a cluster already has a desired
configuration and skip tasks that do not need repeated.

At a high level, playbooks typically begin with the author specifying
which hosts (in our case HyperCore clusters) are going to be targeted.
They will then establish the method by which Ansible will connect to the
remote hosts (in our case this will be *connection:
ansible.builtin.local*). Once these have been established, the author
can begin writing tasks in the order in which they will be carried out;
calling out the necessary ansible modules and module parameters along
the way.

In a future section, you will get an overview of how to start writing
your own playbooks.
